# A Mastery Learning Based Vector Calculus Course

## Overview & References

Here we describe and provide supporting documents to build a mastery
learning based vector calculus course. This course was developed in the
Summer of 2020 by Albert Schueller at Whitman College in Walla Walla, WA
USA. It was offered as an on-line only course during the Fall 2020 semester
in response to the COVID pandemic. The course is normally taught in-person.

In preparation for this course, the following references were consulted:

1. *Grading for Equity* by Joe Feldman, especially Part III - Equitable
   Grading Practices
1. Rachel J. Weir (2019): *Rethinking Precalculus and Calculus: A
   Learner-Centered Approach*, PRIMUS, DOI: 10.1080/10511970.2019.1686669, a
   valuable first-person account of a mastery learning calculus course
1. J. B. Collins, Amanda Harsy, Jarod Hart, Katie Anne Haymaker, Alyssa
   Marie(Armstrong) Hoofnagle, Mike Kuyper Janssen, Jessica Stewart Kelly,
   Austin Tyler Mohr, & Jessica OShaughnessy (2019) *Mastery-Based Testing
   in Undergraduate Mathematics Courses*, PRIMUS, 29:5, 441-460, DOI:
   10.1080/10511970.2018.1488317, 

## Implementation

**Textbook:** [Calulus, Volume
3](https://openstax.org/details/books/calculus-volume-3) from
[OpenStax](https://openstax.org/).

**Flipped:** Videos for each section are on the [Calculus III - Vector Calculus (Calculus 3 OpenStax) YouTube Channel](https://www.youtube.com/playlist?list=PLnDDTiuYdSglSYbQT0hAp8qvsoatvoipM).

**Small Learning Groups:** Students ar divided into small learning
groups. They follow a calendar of readings and learn independently. The
instructor meets with each group for about 30 mins total each week to
answer questions and provide tips and motivation.

**Mastery Assessment:** To establish *mastery* of a section of the book,
students must pass an associated WeBWorK assignment with a 90%. If they did
not pass on the first attempt, they move to a second Retake WeBWorK
assignment. If they do not pass, they meet with the instructor and orally
discuss the missed exercises and then retry either WeBWorK assignment. This
process is repeated until mastery is achieved.

A collection of WeBWorK assignments for each covered section of the
OpenStax textbook as it was in Fall 2020 is available for download in the
WeBWorK folder of this repository. You can upload these to your WeBWorK
server and quickly create the mastery assessments for your own use. See the
WeBWorK tutorial for [Importing Homework
Sets](https://webwork.maa.org/wiki/ImportingHomeworkSetsTutorial) for more
details on this process.

**Tree Based Progress:** Section assessments are the foundation of a
pyramidal or hierachical approach to measuring progress in the course.

![tree based
progress](https://github.com/schuelaw/MasteryVectorCalculus/blob/main/TreeGrading.png)

In the diagram, we see a tree with three levels. The section assessments at
the bottom (the leaves), the chapter assessments in the middle, and the
final assessment at the top (the root). Chapter and Final assessments are
also WeBWorK based and a 90% score is required to demonstrate mastery.

**Final Grade:** The challenge of mastery based systems is your
instition likely will require you to submit some kind of final grade. This
is somewhat antithetical to a mastery approach. 

An imperfect solution to this conundrum is to use a *tree based* scoring
system that feeds into a traditional 10% per letter grade approach, i.e. an
A is 90-100%, a B is 80-89%, etc. Then, compute the final grade as a
percentage of the total number of sections mastered. However, in order to
count a mastered section in your final grade, you must pass the chapter
assessment that contains that section *and* the final exam.

**Example:** Here's an example student's performance during a complete term:

![tree based
progress](https://github.com/schuelaw/MasteryVectorCalculus/blob/main/TreeGradingExample.png)

Passing the chapter assessements "earns" the points from the associated
passed section assessments. This student did not master Sec 2.5 in Ch2,
Sections 3.1 and 3.4 in Ch 3, etc. This student also did not master Ch 2
and hence "lost" the two mastered sections from that chapter. Passing the
final assessment "earns" the points from the chapter assessments. The
percentage of total possible points earned in this scheme determines the
final grade. This student advanced a total of 27 points to the final grade
level. There were a total of 35 points possible, hence the student earned
77% of the total possible points and earned a grade of C.

It should be noted that this is a simplified example. How you ultimately
assign the final grade is ultimately your decision. The tree structured
grading is novel. It introduces incentives to study for the chapter and
final assessments. Since unlimited retakes are possible, the stakes are
relatively low for any particular attempt at an assessment.


